===========================================================================
This document contains text data from: essays.txt, hayes.txt, and songs.txt
===========================================================================






This Fine Arts course was the first "art & technology" course
taught at the University of Victoria. The students involved were
from a variety of disciplines (although, primarily visual arts
students) and had for the most part, little or no previous
exposure to computers. The Computer Lab at the University has, an
array of imperious nerds intent on empire-building, 10 networked
Sun workstations, a few slow Macintoshes, two flatbed scanners,
one PC and some basic pagelayout and photo manipulation software
primarily for the Macintoshes, basic sound/midi equipment, and a
grumpy creative-writing professor who regularly shuffles down the
hall to the faculty-lounge to wash out his teapot. This was
enough equipment to provide glimpses of creative possibilities; I
suspect that enough enthusiasm has been generated to warrant the
purchase of additional equipment and software, and to have this
course offered on a regular basis. A printing press would also be
a nice adjunct to the existing traditional visual art
departments. I have also offered to design and build a virtual
text-based reality (MOO) for the Fine Arts Department.

     Although characterized as a "studio course" I felt it more
appropriate to discuss the larger issues involving technology and
contemporary culture and minimize the importance of a through
"knowledge" of specific software. This was accomplished with
handouts and discussions of pertinent articles, screenings of
appropriate films, and contemporary music. Particular attention
was given to networks and interconnectivity in general and of
course, the Internet. Although this was an introductory course,
the exposure to the various resources available through the
Internet encouraged a phenomenally rapid grasp of both digital
dissemination and the (Unix) operating system.

                    -----------
                    
     Course Description: "A flirtatious romp lightly over the
glittering periphery of digital technology. Has art and the avant
garde disappeared from view, gradually leaking into an
all-pervasive generalized aestheticism? Could it be that
something that might have once been called art is alive and
flourishing between connected networkers... unbeknownst to
implausible and incestuous art institutions? Are there really
still artists around who think they're making art? Are computer
systems virtually enacting the penultimate hierarchy, enforcing
oppressive political privilege; or are they the new democratic,
means of representation? Has the critical art press stood still
under a deluge of new cultural publications? Have we *all* become
artist? These questions and more...!

     "An introduction and collaborative overview and analysis of
fairly recent, mid-range, cultural tools and their implied
functions.

     "Students are encouraged to attend all classes and optimize
their uses of the equipment while exploring various venues
throughout the reserved studio time following the class each
morning. Other facilities on and off-campus will also be
utilized.

     "A reminder that an informal essay of three to four thousand
words is required for this course. It should be "brimming with
original insight and speculation on contemporary culture and
technology." It may be informal in that it employs creative
writing techniques (contemporary structures, verse, quotations,
dialogue, illustrations, etc.). It may make reference to
contemporary media, including the materials/sources shown in
class.

     "Also required, is an electronic-portfolio of visual and
audio art projects. This should demonstrate some degree of
familiarity of software and resources covered in the lab. It need
not be an extensive or necessarily cohesive body of work. It
should be strongly suggestive of a developing approach to
technological media."


----------------------------------------------------------------



ESSAYS:



The Dematerialization of Art, Life, and Real Estate.

"The highest problem of any art is to cause by appearance the
illusion of a higher reality." - Goethe   Although Goethe's exact
meaning is open to interpretation the computer appears to be a
tool ready to meet the spirit of his objectives.  At least in the
minds of many electronic artists.  The computer, particularly
draws the attention of artists today because it epitomizes
current technological development and offers the greatest
potential for exploring new creative places.  If we somehow feel
limited by our imagination, the demands of the marketplace, or
current art theory, the computer is one element that somehow
suggests unlimited potential.  For those who consider themselves
to be Renaissance men and women the computer is a godsend. 
 In addition to being a production tool the computer is a window
on and an interface to the rest of the electronically connected
world.  The computer as production tool switches modes and
becomes a link to countless other artists and resource people
throughout the world.  It only takes a little thought to consider
the possibilities of combining these activities. 

Analyzing the computer as a creative tool is similar to
considering fire as a system to cook one's dinner.  It can
certainly do that but it has some other dimensions and
possibilities.  Understanding the realm of the computer and its
companion data highways is pertinent to its effective use.  What
context does art occupy when it uses electronic space?  What new
creative possibilities does it present, what are its
limitations..  audience..  temporal qualities.. style..
control... access..  money..  appropriation..  credibility..?  Is
there a new underlying language used to create and read
art-cyberart.  Can traditional art fit into the cyberworld?  Can
Venus de Milo be digitized and stored on to a hard drive and
still be a credible work of art?  

The computer as creative tool dematerializes the process of
production.  A painter might personally mix gallons of paint,
spend hours making canvases, wait for paint to dry, spill paint
on his clothes or make a small rip in his canvas.  None of this
is a factor or even a possibility when the image maker uses Adobe
Illustrator.  Is any of this an influencing factor in creating
culturally significant images.  Can these qualities be duplicated
and available in another set of pull-down menus? 
The materiality of art has always been a significant dimension,
not only of its final form but in influencing the creative
process.  Subtleties expressed by Russian sable and bamboo from
the Mediterranean will present a challenge to future programmers. 
Can computers replicate the interaction between traditional
tools, natural materials, and chance occurrence?  The future of
media such as metal-plate etching and lithography may be
perpetuated because of their distinctiveness or they may simply
become an archaic mode to be mimicked by a graphics program.  
However, computers can give us some interesting interpretations
of materials.  Swiftly moving granite-bodied humanoids,
leopard-skinned fish, and chromed-metal mountains may constitute
kitsch imagery but they prove that the computer does genuinely
extend the dynamic range of expression. 

The lack of materiality in creating art is perhaps secondary to
the non-existence of the completed art work.  Although the
finished piece may reside in digital form as a description in
computer code it can only take physical form by another process
of creation, usually mechanical.  This re-creation requires an
interpretation of the original and removes the artist from the
final completed piece.  Psychologically it places him/her in the
category of being a symbolic language worker and analogous to
being a data entry clerk. This method of production mirrors other
mass produced consumer products and merchandise from the music
and entertainment industry.  Questions of authenticity,
provenance, place and uniqueness all affect the value and purpose
of computer generated art work.  So..  can computers be used to
create high art?  

Conversely, artists can now extend their domain greatly.  Most
significantly, they can jump the fences of the traditional
cultural gate keepers. Since most establishment galleries have a
focused audience, limited budgets, and aesthetic agendas the
opportunities for new or alternative works are limited. Informal
electronic galleries can post computer files with minimal cost
and provide many more times the exposure of individual galleries. 
Although some electronic galleries will probably develop their
own gate-keeping qualities the diversity and the large number of
computer installations will probably always provide unique
opportunities for new and non-mainstream art to find an audience. 

Artists that create work for the realm of computers and networks
will find interesting discussions regarding copyright, access,
file standards, reproduction rights, appropriation, modification,
and methods of electronic payment.

New display systems will continue to be developed for outputting
computer files.  Since more and more programs are incorporating
3D functions the interest in VVDs (volume visualization displays)
is growing.  Since the promises of holography and Star Trek to
bring live, full motion, 3D images into our living room has not
materialized, computer controlled optical-mechanical systems are
being developed.  "Holographic displays show some long-term
potential but they can not be generated in real time.  Their
field of view is fundamentally limited, and these displays
typically change their characteristics with the angle from which
they are viewed." As an alternative, Texas Instruments has
produced its Omniview device that allows the display of volumes
in volumetric space.  
Until recently, 3D images have only been displayed on two
dimensional CRTs and have required the inclusion of standard
perspective cues such as shadows, texture gradients, and relative
size comparisons.  Stereo 3D systems have relied on the use of
special glasses to simulate surface depth but could not allow
movement around a three dimensional object.  VVD displays use a
rotating disk that fills the display volume, creating a surface
point at any location in a half-round ball space.  Then by using
laser beams directed by X, Y, & Z computer controllers, images
can be projected to any point in the volume.  The concept is
similar to the pictures drawn at laser shows but here 3 beams are
used.  
A 36 inch diameter version has been built but a 10 foot diameter
model is feasible.  A viewer can circle the display sphere and
see a three dimensional object from all directions while it moves
in real time.  The display's resolution can be changed to any
desired value by redirecting the scanning system to overlap
points.  VVD resolution is expressed in voxels (vo lume  pi
xels).  Early prototypes had 12,000 voxels, while current models
display 70,000.  Three lasers of different colours can provide a
three-colour image or they can be mixed to provide a full colour
palette.  Presently, VVD systems require powerful computers to
calculate 3D display data.  Originally developed for the U.S.
Department of Defense this technology's future will probably be
more applicable to non military purposes.  
Proposed applications include air traffic control visualization. 
Air traffic controllers could look into the sphere and see the
exact location, continuous movement and distance relationship
between circling airplanes.  Pointing to a plane with a laser
beam would bring up its information on the computer screen. 
Other uses include medical diagnosis, weather pattern analysis,
and remote control of space station docking.  Visual artists
could use this system to pre visualize sculpture projects, for
choreography and to output 3D animation sequences.  


Dial Modifiers
Dial modifiers can be combined with the dial (D) command to perform a series 
of operations within a single command line. For example, 
ATDT9W1552368!@#71234; <CR> instructs the modem to use tone dialing to access 
a number outside a PBX, wait for dial tone, dial the number 1552368, enter a 
timed break recall, wait for quiet answer, and issue the PBX transfer code #7 
before dialing extension number 1234, then return to the command state before 
initiating the handshake.

0-9 A B C D # * - Digits/Characters for Dialing 
The digits/characters 0-9 A B C D # * are used to specify what numbers the 
modem will dial. The characters A B C D # * represent specific tone pairs and 
therefore can be used only when tone dialing is selected; these symbols are 
ignored when pulse dialing is used.

P - Pulse Dialing Method
The P dial modifier selects the pulse method of dialing. The P modifier can be 
issued with the dial command, or alone, to indicate the method used for 
subsequent dialings. The factory-set method is pulse. Once this method is 
selected, it is used until the other is chosen, or the modem is reset.

T - Tone Dialing Method
The T dial modifier selects the tone method of dialing. The T modifier can be 
issued with the dial command, or alone, to indicate the method used for 
subsequent dialings. Once this method is selected, it is used until the other 
is chosen, or the modem is reset.

W - Wait for Second Dial Tone
The W dial modifier instructs the modem to wait for dial tone before 
proceeding. If dial tone detection is not completed within the preset time 
limit, the modem hangs up and returns the NO DIALTONE result code. Some PBXs 
do not return a secondary proceed indication (second dial tone). The W dial 
modifier is not effective in such systems and should not be used.

, - Delay Processing of Next Character
The comma (,) dial modifier in a dial string causes the modem to pause before 
processing the next character or symbol in the command line. The duration of 
the pause is determined by the value held in Register S8. The comma is 
frequently inserted after the 9 (digit generally used to gain outside access 
from a PBX) to allow sufficient time for the dial tone to occur before the 
modem dials the telephone number. 

@ - Wait for Quiet Answer
The @ dial modifier instructs the modem to listen for five seconds silence 
before continuing. The number of seconds the modem waits for silence is 
determined by the value held in S7. This modifier is useful when dialing 
telephone systems that produce no dial tone. If a five-second silence has not 
been detected within the period set in S7, the modem hangs up and returns the 
NO ANSWER result code. If it detects the five seconds of silence, the modem 
processes the remaining characters in the dial string. Note that the modem 
does not listen for silence until it first detects dial tone and some other 
signal, such as a ringing signal, that lasts longer than 210 milliseconds. For 
example, to dial 1552368, wait for a quiet answer, then dial a security code 
85939, wait for a second dial tone, and dial extension 423 you would issue the 
following command: ATDT 1552368 @ 85939 W 423 <CR>.

! - Timed Break Recall (Hookflash)
The ! dial modifier issues a timed break recall signal, which causes the modem 
to hang up for 75 milliseconds, then reconnect. This feature can be used to 
access such PBX features as call transfer.

; - Return to Command State after Dialing
The semicolon (;) dial modifier, used only at the end of a command line (just 
before the <CR>), instructs the modem to return to the command state 
immediately after dialing, without breaking the connection. 

The ; is useful when calling an electronic service, such as that offered by a 
bank, that permits you to use tones to transmit numbers once a connection has 
been established. The modem can send tones even if your telephone cannot. The 
example below illustrates the use of the semicolon modifier in communications 
with an electronic banking service.

ATDP 1552368; <CR>  Dials bank using pulse method

OK  Command executed, but keeps the modem in command state (no carrier 
handshake takes place)

ATDT 4768; <CR>  Sends an ID code via tones and maintains modem in command 
state.

OK  Modem in command state; command executed.

In this example, the ; differs from the +++ in that the escape sequence places 
the modem in the command state only when two modems have completed a 
handshake. The semicolon keeps the modem in command state; no CONNECT XXXXX 
result code is displayed.

DS=n - Dialing a Stored Telephone Number
A stored number can be dialed from an asynchronous terminal by following the 
dial (D) command with the S modifier, an equal sign, and the location of the 
stored number (see &Zn=x command at the end of this section). The format of 
the modifier is S=n, where n is location 0-3. If ATDS=2<CR> were issued, for 
example, the modem would dial the string stored in memory location three of 
its "telephone book."

R - Originate a Call in Answer Mode 
The dial modifier R (Reverse mode) enables the modem to dial an originate- 
only modem by placing a call in answer mode. This modifier must be entered at 
the end of the dialling (D) command string, before the <CR>.
The R modifier directs the modem to act as if it had been sent an A command in 
that part of the command string. 

E - Command State Character Echo Selection
The E command determines whether characters are echoed to the DTE from the 
modem when it is command state. Some computers and terminals do not send the 
characters you type to the screen; they only transmit them to the remote 
system through the serial port. In this case, if Command State character echo 
were not enabled by the modem, you would be unable to see what you type. If 
the DTE does echo the characters you type in command state, and this function 
is enabled in the modem, each character typed will appear twice.

Chorus

Yes and there were Union men
 Who wept with joyful tears,
When they saw the honored flag
 They had not seen for years;
Hardly could they be restrained
 From breaking forth in cheers,
While we were marching through Georgia

Chorus

"Sherman's dashing Yankee boys
 Will never make the coast!"
So the saucy rebels said
 and 'twas a handsome boast
Had they not forgot, alas!
 To reckon with the Host
While we were marching through Georgia

Chorus

So we made a thoroughfare for
 Freedom and her train,
Sixty miles of latitude--
 Three hundred to the main;
Treason fled before us,
 For resistance was in vain
While we were marching through Georgia
ALL QUIET ALONG THE POTOMAC TONIGHT - Lyics: Ethel Beers
                                      Music: John Hewitt
                                      1863
"All quiet along the Potomac tonight,"
 Except here and there a stray picket;
Is shot as he walks on his beat to and fro,
 By a rifleman hid in the thicket;
Tis nothing! a private or two now and then,
 Will not count in the new of the battle,
Not an officer lost! only one of the men
 Moaning out all alone the death rattle.
"All quiet along the Potomac tonight!"

"All quiet along the Potomac tonight,"
 Where the soldiers lie peacefully dreaming,
And the tents in the rays of the clear Autumn moon,
 And the light of the campfires are gleaming;
There's only the sound of the lone sentry's tread,
 As he tramps from the rock to the fountain,
And thinks of the two on the low trundle bed,
 Far away in the cot on the mountain.
"All quiet along the Potomac tonight,"

His musket falls slack-his face dark and grim,
 Grows gentle with memories tender,
As he mutters a pray'r for the children asleep
 And their mother "May heaven defend her!"
The moon seems to shine as brightly as then
 That night, when the love yet unspoken,
Leap'd up to his lips, and when low murmur'd vows,
 Were pledg'd to be ever unbroken
"All quiet along the Potomac tonight,"

Then drawing his sleeve roughly o'er his eyes,
 He dashes off the tears that are welling,
And gathers his gun close up to his breast,
 As if to keep down the heart's swelling;
He passes the fountain, the blasted pine tree,
 And his footstep is lagging and weary,
Yet onward he goes thro' the broad belt of light,
 Toward the shades of the forest so dreary
"All quiet along the Potomac tonight,"

Hark! was it the nightwind that rustles the leaves!
 Was it the moonlight so wond'rously flashing?
It look'd like a rifle! "Ha! Mary goodbye!"
 And his lifeblood is ebbing and plashing,
"All quiet along the Potomac tonight",
 No sound save the rush of the river,
While soft falls the dew on the face of the dead,
 The picket's off duty forever
"All quiet along the Potomac tonight,"


THE VACANT CHAIR  - George F. Root, 1862

We shall meet, but we shall miss him,
 there will be one vacant chair;
We shall linger to caress him,
 While we breath our eveneing prayer
When a year ago we gathered,
 Joy was in his mild blue eye;
But a golden chord is severed,
 And our hopes in ruin lie.

Chorus:
We shall meet, but we shall miss him,
 There will be one vacant chair;
We shall linger to caress him,
 When we breath our evening prayer.

At our fireside, sad and lonely,
 Often will the bosom swell;
At remembrence of the story,
 How our noble Willie fell;
How he strove to bear our banner
 Thro' the thickest of the fight,
And uphold our country's honor,
 In the strength of manhood's might.

Chorus:

True they tell us wreaths of glory,
 Evermore will deck his brow,
But this smooths the anguish only
 Sweeping o'er our heartstrings now.
Sleep today, o early fallen,
 In thy green and narrow bed,
Dirges from the pine and cypress,
 Mingle with the tears we shed.

Chorus
